Abstract
========

Background
----------

Recent policy has placed emphasis on identifying and responding to
deterioration among ward patients including early access to critical
care. However, critical care provision in the NHS is constrained, delay
to admission is likely, and patient outcomes poorly understood.

Methods
-------

We conducted a prospective cohort study of consecutive deteriorating
ward patients referred to critical care in 48 NHS hospitals (1 November
2010 --- 31 December 2011). We recorded both the assessor's
recommendation for critical care, and the decision to admit. Patients
were followed for 1 week for critical care use, and for 1 year for
survival by linking to national registries. Incidence models were
stratified by the NHS National Early Warning Score (NEWS) risk class,
and used generalised estimating equations. Decision making and survival
were modelled with random effects for the hospital using logistic
regression, and proportional hazards respectively.

Findings
--------

We included 15158 patients of whom 6759 (45%) were in the highest NEWS
risk class --- equivalent to 17 high risk patients (95%CI 17--18) per
hospital per month. The critical care unit was full at the time of 1198
(8%) referrals. 5164 (34%) patients were in established organ failure
with only 870 patients (6%) already on organ support. Sepsis was
reported in 9296 (61%) patients.

2141 (14%) patients with treatment limitation orders were refused
critical care with 7-day, 90-day, and 1-year mortalities of 41%, 65%,
and 76% respectively. They were not considered further.

The bedside assessor recommended 4976 (38%) of the remainder for
critical care of whom 3375 (68%) were accepted. Patients over 80 years
were less likely to be accepted (OR 0.60 95%CI 0.53--0.69) as were those
assesssed when the unit was full (OR 0.70, 95%CI 0.57-0.86). Decision
making varied between hospitals (Median interhospital OR 2.11,
95%1.81--2.42).

Of the 1601 (32%) patients recommended but initially refused, 1021 (64%)
were admitted later and 179 (11.2%) died without admission. The median
delay between asssessment and admission was 2 hours (IQR 1--4) if
initially accepted, but increased if initially refused (9 hours \[IQR
9--10\]).

were recommended for critical care but were refused immediate admission.
Of these,

Referral when the unit was full decreased the odds of being accepted OR
0.72 (95%CI 0.59--0.88), and the odds of being admitted promptly OR 0.27
(95%CI 0.19--0.37).

In 13017 (86%) patients without treatment limits, mortality occured
early with 964 (7%), 1827 (14%), and 3935 (30%) deaths at 2, 7, and 90
days respectively. Survival was worse for patients asssessed when the
critical care unit was full (HR 1.13, 95%CI1.00--1.27), and varied
between site even after adjustment for patient level risk factors
(Median Hazard Ratio 1.28, 95%CI 1.26--1.30). In the 2141 patients with
treatment limits, 90 day mortality was 66% (1402 deaths).

Conclusion
----------

Deteriorating ward patients referred to critical care are vulnerable
with a high initial mortality. Despite clinical recommendation for
admission a substantial minority die without admission, and high
critical care occupancy both predujices and delays admission.

Funding
-------

Wellcome Trust, NIHR Service Support Costs, and the Intensive Care
National Audit & Research Centre
