# Introduction

There are more than 160 acute hospitals in England that care for more than 11 million overnight hospital admissions per annum. Each patient spends a mean of 5 days on a hospital ward.[@Anonymous:tc] These inpatients undergo a process of continual triage, and those who deteriorate are referred to critical care. This interface between the ward and critical care has been a priority area for the English National Health Service (NHS), but available data derive from qualitative work such as the NHS National Patient Safety Agency report[@Luettel:2007va], relatively small retrospective studies[@McQuillan:1998uj], or voluntary reporting systems[@Cullinane:2005vg]. 

Recent reports from the US, Canada and North America suggest that critical care capacity is an important factor in the decision making that surrounds admission to critical care.[@Chen:2012hu; @Stelfox:2012iy; @Robert:2012ep] Critical care provision in the NHS is constrained despite a one-third increase in funding for beds in 2000. In 2010, the United Kingdom (UK) was ranked 24 out of 28 European countries in terms of provision of critical care beds per capita population.[@Rhodes:2012kb] Similar results are found when the comparison is with North American health care systems.[@Wunsch:2008kk] This ought to imply that access to critical care here is correspondingly constrained, and that delay to admission is an important problem. 

Ward patients affected by this are likely to be among the most vulnerable in the hospital. Existing international reports quote hospital mortality as 26% (Australia), and 30-day mortality as 28% (Israel).[@Simchen:2007bn; @Buist:2002kc] This greatly exceeds the 9% inpatient 30-day mortality recently reported in Scottish NHS hospitals.[@Clark:2014hu] 

We set out to estimate the typical delay to admission to critical care, and to examine the factors surrounding this with particular reference to critical care occupancy. Previous studies of delay typically limit themselves to comparisons of early versus late admissions. Excluding patients who are never admitted introduces the risk of a survivor bias (those who die before late admission), and an exclusion bias (those who survive without admission). We have instead performed a prospective study of all patients referred to critical care, and mapped their pathways in detail for the first week following referral whilst completing follow-up for all out to one year.

