# Methods

## Study design and participants

The (SPOT)light study was a prospective observational cohort study of the deteriorating ward patient referred to critical care. The physiological status of the patient at the time of the first bedside assessment by critical care was prospectively recorded along with the recommendation made at the end of the assessment. By linking the records generated at the time of the bedside assessment, to the Intensive Care National Audit & Research Centre's Case Mix Programme Database (ICNARC CMPD), the fact and timing of admission to critical care was identified. Similarly, by linking to the NHS Information Service then vital status up to 1 year was recorded. 

Patients were eligible if they were inpatients on general hospital wards who had been referred to, and assessed by, critical care. The assessment had to be performed at the bedside by a member of the critical care team. This was defined broadly to include members of the critical care outreach service, or members of the critical care medical or nursing staff. Only the first assessment for a given episode of illness was eligible. Cardiac arrests, planned admissions, and visits that were retrievals of patients where a decision to admit had already been made were not eligible. 

Patient demographics, and the date, time and location of the visit were recorded, along with the level of care at the time of the visit.[2000, \#1009] Available patient physiology (vital signs, arterial blood gas and laboratory measurements) at the time of, or immediately preceding, the visit was abstracted along with organ support, antibiotic therapy, and a subjective assessment of the likelihood of sepsis, and its source. The assessor was then asked to report the level of care recommended, and the outcome of the decision to admit to critical care. Treatment limitation orders were recorded for those not admitted. 

## Procedures

The study was registered on the National Institute of Health Research (NIHR) research portfolio, and hospitals were eligible if they participated in the CMP. Research teams at each hospital attended a Dataset Familiarisation Course, and a data collection manual containing definitions of items to be collected was provided. The Clinical Trials Unit at ICNARC provided support for research queries during the study.

Hospitals were asked to report all consecutive ward referrals to the critical care team. Where possible, data collection was to be contemporaneous, and hospitals were requested to identify and submit missed referrals. We used the proportion of emergency ward admissions in the ICNARC CMP that were successfully linked to the (SPOT)light database to quality control the study. Data quality was judged on a monthly basis, and all data from individual months falling below a minimum standard of 80% data linkage were excluded. Reporting was via a secure online web portal which performed real-time field and record level validation. Further on-line validation reports were completed by all hospitals before the database was locked in September 2012. Fact and date of death were then requested from the NHS Information Service. CCOT provision was reported by participating hospitals, and contemporaneous CMP data and Hospital Episode Statistics (HES) were used to define critical care provision, occupancy, and hospital characteristics.

## Statistical analysis

The primary outcome was 90-day mortality. Sample size was calculated to evaluate mortality increases from delay to admission using estimates from 2007 ICNARC CMP data. The target sample size was 12,075--20,125 patients referred to critical care which allowed for delays to occur in 10--40% of admissions and mortality effect sizes of 5--10%. 

Physiology measurements at the time of the ward assessment were abstracted. From these, the ICNARC physiology score, the NHS National Early Warning Score and the Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score were calculated with missing values given zero weights as recommended.[Physicians, 2012, \#9726; Harrison et al., 2007, \#1640; Vincent et al., 1996, \#719] The NEWS score additionally defines three risk classes (Low, Medium, and High) designed to trigger an escalating clinical response.

The patient's existing dependency at assessment was defined using the UK Critical Care Minimum Dataset (CCMDS) levels of care: Levels 0 and 1 are most commonly provided on normal wards while Levels 2 and 3 are within high dependency (HDU) and intensive care units (ICU) respectively.{2013f} The level of care recommended was recorded using the same scale, along with the decision to admit. Prompt admission was defined as one occuring within four hours of ward assessment, in line with recently published UK guidelines.{2013f}

The indicator of critical care unit occupancy was the difference between the maximum number of beds reported to ICNARC, and the number of actively treated patients occupying those beds at the time the ward patient was assessed. Bed pressure was defined as being high (zero or fewer beds), medium (one or two beds), or low (three or more beds).

Incidence models were stratified by NEWS risk class. The unit of analysis was a study day so that daily fluctuations in lagged critical care occupancy could be examined. Estimation was via generalised estimating equations (GEE) with hospitals as clusters, and day-by-day correlations modelled using a first order autoregressive structure. Decision to admit was modelled multi-level logisitc regression with patients nested within hospitals. Cox proportional hazards were used to model survival with a shared frailty. The proportional hazards assumption was checked by inspecting plots of smoothed exponentiated standardised Schoënfeld residuals, and re-entering terms using time-varying co-efficients where necessary. We reported random effects using the Median Odds Ratio (MOR), and the Median Hazard Ratio (MHR) using the bootstrap to generate 95% confidence intervals. These statistics represent the median difference when comparing outcomes from any two randomly selected hospitals.[Bengtsson and Dribe, 2010, \#60939]

Categorical data were reported as counts and percentages, and continuous data as mean (SD) or median (IQR) values. Effect measures are reported with their 95% confidence intervals.

## Role of the funding source

The study was centrally funded by the Wellcome Trust, sponsored by ICNARC, and supported at NHS hospitals through the National Institute of Health Research service support costs. The funders of the study had no role in the study design; gathering, analysis, and interpretation of the data; writing of the report; and decision to submit the report for publication. The corresponding author had full access to all the data (including statistical reports and tables); takes responsibility for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis; and takes final responsibility for the decision to submit for publication.

