Results
=======

48 hospitals reported 20893 visits over 435 months. 2694 visits (12.9%)
did not meet the inclusion criteria including 1860 (8.9%) repeat rather
than first visits, and 586 (2.8%) patients recently discharged from
critical care. Data linkage was incomplete (&lt; 80%) for 66 (15%)
study-months excluding a further 2440 (11.7%) visits. Therefore 15759
patients were recruited to the study, of which 15158 (96.1%) completed
follow-up without error and were available for analysis (Figure 1).
Final data linkage (ward visits to critical care admissions) was 93%
complete.

Participating hospitals
-----------------------

The participating hospitals comprised 10 teaching and 38 general
hospitals that each collected data between September 2010 and December
2011 for a median of 8 months (IQR 5--9 months). Each hospital
contributed a median of 252 patients (IQR 162--380) equivalent to 6
patients referred to critical care (IQR 3--9) per 1,000 overnight
admissions. Critical Care Outreach Teams operated 24 hours/day and 7
days/week in 14 (29%) hospitals, less than 24 hours/day in 19 (40%)
hospitals, and less than 7 days/week in 13 (27%) hospitals.

There was a median of 12 (IQR 9--18) critical care beds per hospital
(mixed Level 2 --- typically intensive monitoring or single organ
support, and Level 3 --- ventilated or multiple organ support), most
often in a single physical location (45 hospitals).

Incidence of critical care referrals
------------------------------------

<!-- numbers here from stata log files for table -->
We estimated the mean incidence of referrals to critical care at 46
(95%CI 50--54) patients per month of which 17 (95%CI 17--18) patients
would meet the definition of NEWS high risk at assessment. This was for
a non-teaching hospital with 50,000 overnight admissions per year, and
24/7 CCOT provision. As critical care outreach provision decreased then
the number of patients assessed fell (supplementary Table 1). Winter was
busier (IRR 1.22, 95%CI 1.14--1.31), and weekends quieter (IRR 0.87,
95%CI 0.82-0.92) than non-winter weekday periods. When we included a
measure of case finding in the models (cases assessed per 1000 overnight
hospital admissions), referral incidence increased initially but may
have begun to plateau for the hospitals with referral rates in the
highest quartile (supplementary Figure 3).

Patient characteristics
-----------------------

Table 1 shows the baseline data for all ward patients assessed. Sepsis
was reported in (9296, 61%) patients. Of these, the respiratory system
was considered to be the source in half (4772, 51%). Organ failure,
defined as a SOFA score greater than or equal to two, was present in
5164 (34%) of patients. 1427 patients (9%) were in respiratory failure,
2931 (19%) were in renal failure, and 4636 (31%) were shocked. Organ
support at the time of assessment was, however, uncommon (870 patients,
6%).

Overall, 2708 (17.9%) patients died during the 7-days following ward
assessment. Mortality was heavily front-loaded with 1539 (56.8%) of
these deaths occuring in the first 48 hours (supplementary Figure 1).
There was a clear correlation between physiological severity and early
(7-day) mortality using either ward based (NEWS) or critical care
scoring systems (SOFA, ICNARC) (supplementary Figure 2). For example,
there were 328 (9%), 629 (15%), and 1734 (26%) deaths within a week for
NEWS low, medium and high risk classes respectively.

Patient pathways following ward assessment
------------------------------------------

We extracted two clinical decisions at the point of the bedside
assessment. We asked whether the bedside assessor would recommend the
patient for critical care (5321 patients \[35%\] recommended versus 9837
patients \[65%\] recommended for ward care). Additionally, we recorded
the decision to admit, and classified patients as either initially
refused (9471 patients, 62%), initially refused with treatment
limitations (2141 patients, 14%), or immediately accepted to critical
care (3546 patients, 23%). Amongst those recommended for critical care,
the proportions initially refused (without treatment limits), initially
refused with limits, or immediately accepted were 30% (1601 patients),
6% (345 patients), and 63% (3375 patients) respectively.

We then tracked patient pathways over the following week.

### Patients initially refused critical care (without treatment limits)

Patients referred to, but then refused, critical care (without treatment
limitations) had a 7-day mortality of 12% (1102 deaths). Most deaths
(799 deaths 73%) occured on the ward without critical care but 303
deaths (27%) followed delayed admission. Overall, the initial decision
to refuse was reversed in 1745 patients (18%) so by the end of the week
2544 (27%) patients had died or been admitted to critical care.

7-day mortality was higher for those recommended but refused (17.6%
versus 10.4%, risk difference 7.1% 95%CI 5.1--9.1%), and for those where
the initial decision to refuse was reversed (17.4% versus 10.3%, risk
difference 7.0% 95%CI 5.1--9.0%).

### Patients with treatment limits (and refused critical care)

These 2141 patients had a 7-day mortality of 41% (881 deaths). The
initial decision to refuse admission was reversed in just 76 patients
(4%) of whom 26 (34%) died within the week.

Compared to those refused without a treatment limitation order, this
cohort was older (77 vs 66 years, 95%CI for difference 11--12 years),
and more acutely unwell (3.6 vs 2.8 SOFA points, 95%CI for difference
0.7--0.9). The final 90-day mortality was substantial 65% (1402 deaths),
nonetheless 506 patients (24%) survived a year despite the decision.

### Patients immediately accepted to critical care

The 3546 (23%) patients accepted to critical care at the initial bedside
assessment had a 7-day mortality of 20% (725 deaths). Just 42 (6%) of
those deaths occurred before admission was arranged, but a further 254
patients (9%) were never admitted but survived regardless.

Those offered admission were marginally younger (64.1 versus 65.6 years,
95%CI 0.8--2.2 years), and more acutely unwell (4.1 versus 2.8 SOFA
points, 95%CI 1.2--1.3).

The median delay between assessment and admission for these patients was
2 hours (IQR 1--4) compared to 12 hours (IQR 5--29) for those refused
without treatment limits (median additional delay 9 hours, IQR 9--10).
This meant that 2277 (74%) admissions were achieved within 4 hours for
those initially accepted versus 256 (16%) for those initially refused
(risk difference 58%, 95%CI 56--60%).

Critical care occupancy
-----------------------

There were 1198 (8%) patients assessed when the unit was full, 3757
(25%) assessed when there were either one or two beds available, and
10197 (67%) assessed when there were more than two beds available (Table
2). Critical care occupancy fluctuated with time of the day, day of the
week, and season of the year (supplementary Figure 2).

As occupancy at the time of assessment increased, patients were less
likely to be immediately, or ever, accepted to critical care; less
likely to be admitted promptly; and, more likely to die on the ward
without critical admission (Table 3, Cochran-Armitage test for trend
p&lt;0.0001 for all measures).

Determinants of decision making at the bedside assessment
---------------------------------------------------------

We defined patients initially refused (without treatment limits) as the
control group, and built a multi-level (patients nested within
hospitals) logistic regression model to examine factors associated with
a decision to admit. As with the univariate comparisons above, older
patients were less likely to be admitted (OR 0.60 for patients over 80
years, 95%CI 0.53--0.69), and sicker patients were more likely to be
admitted (OR 1.07 per ICNARC physiology point (e.g. an increase in heart
rate from 105 to 115), 95%CI 1.06--1.07). Similarly, patients already
receiving organ support (OR 1.83 95%CI 1.55--2.16), or clinically judged
to be peri-arrest (OR 6.32 95%CI 5.18--7.70) were much more likely to be
admitted.

Patients referred out-of-hours (7pm-7am), during the weekend, or during
the winter were more likely to be offered critical care (95%CI for odds
ratios from 1.04 to 1.33), but those assessed when the critical care
unit was at, or near capacity were less likely to be admitted (OR 0.70,
95%CI 0.57--0.86, and OR 0.87 95%CI 0.77--0.98 respectively). Otherwise
said, had there been no limitations on capacity then an additional 122
patients (95%CI 53-186) would have been admitted.

The model also demonstrated significant hospital level variation with a
Median Odds Ratio (MOR) between hospitals of 2.11 (95%CI 1.81-2.42).
This implies that when comparing patients from any two randomly selected
hospitals the adjusted odds of being offered critical care varied by
approximately two fold. When compared to the same model but excluding
patient predictors, the MOR (MOR 2.18 95%CI 1.82--2.60) was similar.
This suggests that unless there are unmeasured patient level predictors
more important than those we measured, this variability is not due to
incomplete risk adjustment.

Determinants of prompt admission
--------------------------------

The modelling was repeated but now with the delivery of admission to
critical care within 4 hours (a prompt admission) as the outcome, and
the decision to admit as an additional predictor. We excluded an
additional 358 (2.4%) patients where surgery prior to admission
inevitably delayed admission.

The associations between prompt admission and patient level predictors
were broadly similar with younger and sicker patients being admitted
more promptly (Table TTT). However, patients assessed during the winter,
while being more likely to be offered critical care, were now less
likely to be admitted promptly (OR 0.76, 95%CI 0.64--0.90). The
strongest predictor of prompt admission was a decision to admit at the
initial bedside assessment (OR 69 95%CI 59--81). Even though the
decision to admit was included in the model, occupancy stil had a marked
effect (OR 0.27 \[95%CI 0.19--0.37\] for a prompt admission for the 1170
(8%) patients assessed when critical care was full). Hospital level
variation, with respect to the delivery of prompt admission, persisted
(MOR 1.89, 95%CI 1.63--2.21).

Determinants of 90-day mortality
--------------------------------

<!-- 
     _ __ ___  ___ _   _ _ __ ___   ___ 
    | '__/ _ \/ __| | | | '_ ` _ \ / _ \
    | | |  __/\__ \ |_| | | | | | |  __/
    |_|  \___||___/\__,_|_| |_| |_|\___|
-->
There were 706 deaths by the end of the first day, 2,787 by the end of
the first week, 4,561 by the end of the first month, and 6,989 by the
end of the first year. The risk of death at these time points was 4·5%,
17·9%, 29·2%, and 44·8% respectively (Kaplan-Meier failure function).
The period of greatest risk immediately followed the referral, falls
rapidly, but remained elevated even at one-year (excess mortality 0·103
deaths/patient-year, 95%CI 0·076--0·130.(\[Figure
4\]\[figure4\]).\[Cancer Research UK Cancer Survival Group, 2006,
\#91622\]

During the week following the ward visit, the majority (1767, 63·4%) of
deaths occurred without admission to critical care. The majority of
these patients (934, 52·9%) had no treatment limitation order reported
at the time of their initial evaluation (\[Figure 5\]\[figure5\]). These
patients were less unwell (SOFA score -0·68, 95%CI -0·46 to -0·91), but
older (6·3 years, 95%CI 5·1--7·5) than those deaths occurring in ICU
([supplementary Table 4](stb04_ward_vs_icu_deaths.ods)). A small
proportion (66, 7·1%) of the ward deaths had been accepted to critical
care, but died before the admission was realised. In contrast, among
those with treatment limitation orders, 472 (23·1%) patients survived to
one year without admission to critical care in that first week.

A series of models were fitted with 90-day survival as the dependent
variable. The final best model [Table 4](tb03_ward_survival_final.ods)
incorporated a time-varying effect for acute physiological severity so
that the effect of severity on survival was greatest in the first days
following assessment (see supplementary [supplementary Figure
1](sfig01_survival_icnarc0_ssresidual.pdf)). Other patient level risk
factors were consistent with the existing literature on outcomes in
similar patients: older patients, males, patients receiving a higher
level of care, and those with sepsis (other than genito-urinary) had
worse outcomes.\[Harrison, 2007\] Patients admitted during the winter
months had an adjusted hazard ratio of 1·12 (95%CI 1·04--1·20), but
neither time of day, nor day of the week affected survival.

At the hospital level, with the exception of the two hospitals without a
CCOT service, there was weak stepwise decrease in survival as the
provision of CCOT services expanded. No other hospital level factors
were associated with outcome. The final best model demonstrated
significant hospital level variation (variance 0·030, 95%CI
0·013--0·046, [supplementary Figure 2](sfig02_survival_reffects.pdf)).
This gives a Median Hazard Ratio (MHR) between hospitals of 1·28 in the
final model which was not markedly affected by adjustment for patient
characteristics (MHR 1·29 in a model excluding these).
