# Discussion

## Main findings

We describe the events following bedside assessment by critical care of more than 15000 ward patients in 48 acute NHS hospitals. Nearly half (45%) of these patients were defined as being at high risk by current guidelines[@Anonymous:2012un], and one-third (33%) were assessed when the critical care unit was under-strain (two or fewer beds available). One in twelve (8%) were assessed when the unit was completely full. 

The strain on capacity affected decision making at the bedside, and, despite adjustment for major patient specific risk factors, this decision making also varied between hospitals regardless of strain. There was additional evidence of rationing of critical care in that we also observed a bias against admitting the elderly.

The consequences of critical care strain, and inter-hospital variation in decision making were two-fold. Firstly, affected patients were less likely to be cared for during their acute illness in critical care, and correspondingly more likely to die on the ward without critical care. This was true even for the cohort of patients for whom the bedside assessor thought critical care was justified. Secondly, patients who did eventually receive critical care had their admission delayed --- both directly (prompt admission was simply less likely), and indirectly (refusing immediate admission incurred a period of ward care before that refusal was reviewed).

With an immediate decision to admit, one-quarter of patients were still not admitted within the recommended four hour window. Moreover, the three-quarters admitted promptly represented only half of those assessed as requiring critical care. It is also worth noting that compared to the international literature this four hour target is not strict.[@Stelfox:2012iy; @Robert:2012ep]

The delivery of prompt critical care depends on a chain of events. A patient would need to find themselves in the right hospital, and to deteriorate at a time when critical care capacity was not limited. The ward team needs to refer appropriately, and the critical care team to judge accurately the patient's need. In our model, the most important of these events was the decision to admit, but both through that decision, and in addition to it, critical care capacity, and wider hospital factors affect the delivery of prompt critical care.

The mortality rate in these patients is high. Around one in three patients assessed die within 90-days, and nearly one half do not survive a year. Because patients with treatment limits were in a minority, excluding them only mildly improves these statistics. The mortality rate is double that reported in a recent national study of all hospital inpatients in Scotland.[@Clark:2014hu]  It is, in fact, not dissimilar to that seen in the unselected critical care population even though only a minority of these of these patients are admitted.[@Harrison:2014ei; @Harrison:2007jt]

Importantly, early (7-day) mortality is still elevated either for patients defined as objectively low risk by NEWS class, or subjectively low risk by the bedside assessor (recommended ward care only). In other words, mere referral for ward assessment by critical care is already effectively identifying high risk popoulation. The bedside assessment further stratifies that risk, but does not effectively isolate a minimal risk population safe to leave without follow-up. 

This risk is heavily front-loaded with around half of deaths in the first week, and half of the first week deaths in the first 48 hours. This strongly suggests that the opportunity for intervention in these patients has either passed, or is very limited.

Once again, hospital level variation remains a significant factor. We could not show a direct effect of occupancy on mortality in this model. However, if part of the effect of being in a 'good' hospital is mediated through how critical care occupancy is managed then we would have inappropriately 'adjusted away' this difference. In a single level model, the effect of occupancy on mortality was greater, and we cannot confidently exclude occupancy as having a clinically important effect. Our observation that, as critical care capacity become more constrained, those patients eventually admitted both waited longer, and  deteriorated further, would be consistent with this. 

Finally, although the incidence of referals to critical care increased during the winter and occupancy increased correspondingly, we saw no independent increase in risk adjusted survival, nor for those assessed out-of-hours or over the weekend.

## Comparison with other studies

There are no similar studies of ward patients referred to critical care in the UK, however resorting again to international comparisons, then it would appear that the incidence of referrals we report is much lower. We observed around 8 unselected referrals per 1,000 inpatient admissions whereas others report in the range of 25--50.[@Jones:2011gy; @Buist:2007oq; @Bell:2006gr; @Simchen:2004vf] There is an association between CCOT provision and case finding, and a discussion in the literature that of a ceiling effect for case finding.[@Jones:2009ky] It is unlikely that participating hospitals are approaching this limit.

Despite our smaller and presumably more selected population, the mortality we observe is not dissimilar to that in the aforementioned international reports. Direct comparisons are difficult because the metrics report differ (hospital mortality versus 30-day survival), but give the probable length of stay then it is unlikely that outcomes will differ substantially.[@Harrison:2004brb] If mortality is similar then it is surprising given our more selected cohort. One possible explanation is that, just as we see substantial mortality in patients triaged to active ward care as well as immediately accepted to critical care, then it is possible that poor hospital outcomes are a feature of the wider group of potential referrals.  

For additional context, it is worth comparing the overall 61% one year survival for the ward patients referred to critical care to that for patients diagnosed with lung (30%), colorectal (75%) and breast cancer (95%) in the UK.[@Coleman:2011ip]

Finally, occupancy rates here vastly exceed those seen in a recent report from the US Veteran's Affairs hospitals, but are not dissimilar to those in France or Canada.[@Chen:2012hu; @Stelfox:2012iy; @Robert:2012ep] However, since our delay to admission is markedly worse than these studies (between 1 and 5 hours for direct and indirect admissions versus 2 and 12 hours in this study), it is possible that the consequences of occupancy also vary. Delayed discharges because of lack of inpatient ward capacity are increasingly common in the NHS, and present a more significant impediment to ICU admission than a unit that chooses to defer discharge until the need arises but has no problem doing so when required.

## Strengths and limitations

This is the largest prospective study of deteriorating ward patients to date. The hospitals contributing are representative of the full spectrum of those in the NHS. Most importantly, we have performed follow-up of all patients referred to critical care rather than just the subset of those offered admission.[@OCallaghan:2012da] The benefits of this are two-fold.

Firstly, this 'denominator' data allows us to examine the demand for critical care arising from inpatient work. Secondly, follow-up of all patients assessed generates the control group for us to understand the consequences of bedside decision making without bias. With two notable exceptions[@Stelfox:2012iy; @Robert:2012ep], most studies of ward patients referred to critical care only follow those eventually admitted. Evaluations of decision making are therefore limited to early versus late admission, and suffer from survival and exclusion bias. They cannot report on patients who die without critical care admission, or survive despite initial refusal. Our work demonstrates that such patients are numerous. In fact in the first week, even after excluding patients with treatment limits, most deaths occur on the ward without critical care.

An additional strength has been our ability to link the precise time of the bedside assessment to the contemporaneous occupancy of the critical care unit allows us to observe the pressures on decision makers, and the effect that limiting resources has on patient pathways. Moreover, because we prospectively captured the raw physiology that define the severity of illness as well as the bedside recommendation for critical care, we are able to report on the outcomes for the population that either would or should have been admitted were these limits not in play.

Finally, we have completed follow-up to one year, and whilst we see that mortality is substantial, it predominantly an early problem thereby supporting the concept of early intervention. In particular, our observation that one in four patients with a treatment limitation orders survive a year without critical care suggests a need for humility before refusing early intervention on the grounds of long term prognosis.

Some limitations also deserve highlighting. We have performed real time data collection in order to capture the decision making process and the severity of illness used to inform that decision making. To make this feasible, we have collected the minimum data necessary to define the acute illness. Despite this, we had to remove data submitted that appeared incomplete. Restricting the study to hospitals participating in the ICNARC CMP, brought two partial solutions. Firstly, by linking the study data to the CMP data we could reduce the data collection burden. Secondly, we could use the list of ward admissions to critical care to verify that we were capturing all ward referrals. We assumed that where admissions were incompletely captured then so would be referrals, and prospectively excluded offending periods of data.
We must also assume that a proportion of referrals were missed too. Reassuringly, we tested our findings by raising the threshold for judging data capture to 90% so that the median proportion of eligible admissions was 97%. We found no consistent difference in any result other than a fall in precision as the quality threshold increased, and the sample size inevitably fell.

The second weakness is structural rather than operational, and is that, in defining our population as those referred, we cannot comment on the process that leads to that referral. The literature typically names the ward monitoring process leading to referral as the afferent limb, and response of critical care to that referral as the efferent limb of a rapid response system. There is clearly both an unobserved period of deterioration prior to referral for patients in the study, and an unobserved population that might have been referred. Both these afferent components are as valid targets for intervention, as the observed efferent components of the pathway that we have discussed. However, observing the wider group of potential referrals would require a much briefer, narrower study.[@Simchen:2007bn]

Lastly, we have limited our discussion here to our first study objective: to understand the circumstances around delay to admission for patients referred to critical care. We are planning to report our evaluation of the consequences of this delay separately, because the we believe that the basic story describing the epidemiology of this cohort is independently important. These patients are numerous, and vulnerable. There appears to be a brief window of opportunity for intervention, and important variation in practice between hospitals. This variation is in part explained by resource constraints that are more severe in the NHS than in other health care systems. With current trends of increasing pressure on the health service, these problems are only likely to become more important.

## Conclusions and implications for practice and future research
<!-- Conclusion,
- Address, but do not “over-sell”, perceived significance of the study to the field and possible implications for practice/policy
- Ensure conclusions relate directly to the stated a priori hypothesis (and not hypotheses from other studies or outside the area of the study)
- Avoid excessive generalizations of the implications, including unjustified extrapolations beyond the actual population(s) studied
- Remember that except for randomized, controlled trials, there can only be testable hypotheses and observed associations, rather than rigorous proof of cause and effect
- Address areas for improvement with future studies
 -->

Aspects of the study stand independent of these limitations. Regardless, of the effect of prompt admission to critical care, we have identified a cohort of hospital patients at very high risk. This risk is heavily front-loaded, and the window for intervention is short. The bedside assessment is an effective but imperfect triage tool, as the mortality in those initially refused admission is high. Given that we already excluded patients with treatment limitations, it is of concern that around half of these early deaths occur without a trial of critical care.

A substantial proportion of patients recommended for critical care are not offered a bed, and this proportion increases when capacity is limited. Expanding critical care bed numbers would first and foremost benefit this group. This is an opportunity to create a virtuous circle. Earlier admission may lead to shorter stays thereby improving flow through critical care as well as outcomes. Identifying those patients who should be admitted promptly is already the top priority for both clinicians and patients.[@Reay:2014vm] What we have contributed we hope, is firm evidence in support of this.

