In the cover letter
Details of previous publications from the same study - including in scientific abstracts or partial reports by the media at scientific meetings and in foreign language journals.
Details of any previous publication of the same study in electronic form. For example, The BM does not consider posting of protocols and results in clinical trials registries to be prior publication, but we would like to know if results have been posted, and where (please provide URLs or trial registration details). And we are pleased to consider articles based on longer systematic reviews and meta-analyses published at the Cochrane Library or HTA database.
Names and contact details (including email addresses) of suitable peer reviewers; we often find authors' suggestions helpful, although this is optional.
Assurance that a study funded or sponsored by industry follows the guidelines on good publication practice. These GPP2 guidelines aim to ensure that such studies are published in a responsible and ethical manner. The guidelines cover companies’ responsibility to endeavour to publish results of all studies, companies’ relations with investigators, measures to prevent redundant or premature publication, the roles of authors and contrbutors, and the role of professional medical writers.
Assurance that any article written by a professional medical writer follows the guidelines by the European Medical Writers' Association on the role of professional medical writers. The guidelines emphasise the importance of respecting widely recognised authorship criteria, and in particular of ensuring that all people listed as named authors have full control of the content of articles. The role of professional medical writers must be transparent. Please name any professional medical writer among the list of contributors to any article for the BMJ (not only original research articles), and specify in the formal funding statement for the article who paid the writer. Writers and authors must have access to relevant data while writing articles. Medical writers have professional responsibilities to ensure that the articles they write are scientifically valid and are written in accordance with generally accepted ethical standards.