Messages
========

-   focus on patients recommended for critical care as main analysis subgrp

-   decision to admit appears to reduce mortality and IV analysis would suggest
    that this is robust even if we think there is 'confounding'

Taskpaper
=========

Notes
=====

NOTE: 2015-11-02 - [ ] focus/emphasise in intro and methods: bedside assessment
and recommendation; ?might need a diagram to explain this - or add this into the
flow diagram NOTE: 2015-10-27 - [ ] focus on week 1 NOTE: 2015-10-28 - [ ] focus
on decision to admit (and secondarily consequences of timing since this allows
you to keep the theatre patients) NOTE: 2015-11-02 - [ ] focus on decision to
admit since this avoids issues with selection and exclusion bias NOTE:
2015-11-02 - [ ] could use a simple linear IV model to handle the issue of
confounding and present this as a sensitivity analysis rather than as the main
thrust of the paper; use risk differences as per
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwn299 NOTE: 2015-11-05 - [ ] explain that used
logisitic models for simplicity but present hazard models in ESM (hence
comparability when working with IV models)

Methods
=======

-   To explore the variation in acute hospital mortality between regions, the
    median odds ratio (MOR) was calculated [16, 17]. The aim of the MOR is to
    convert the regional-level variance to a more intuitive OR scale. If the MOR
    is 1, then there is no variation between regions. If there is considerable
    variation between regions, then the MOR will be large.

Confirmatory and sensitivity analyses
-------------------------------------

-   instrumental variable

    -   different definitions of occupancy (max vs reported beds, cut-offs)

-   data linkage quality

-   early timing definition

-   diagnostic subgroups esp respiratory sepsis (where theatre should not be an
    issue)

Results
=======

48 hospitals reported 20893 visits over 435 months. 2694 visits (12.9%) did not
meet the inclusion criteria including 1860 (8.9%) repeat rather than first
visits, and 586 (2.8%) patients recently discharged from critical care. Data
linkage was incomplete (\< 80%) for 66 (15%) study-months excluding a further
2440 (11.7%) visits. Therefore 15759 patients were recruited to the study, of
which 15158 (96.1%) completed follow-up without error and were available for
analysis ([Figure FFF][figureFFF]). Final data linkage (ward visits to critical
care admissions) was 93% complete.

Hospitals (and epidemiology)
----------------------------

The participating hospitals comprised 10 teaching and 38 general hospitals that
each collected data between September 2010 and December 2011 for a median of 8
months (range 2--12 months). Each hospital contributed a median of 253 patients
(range 80--1305) equivalent to 6 patients referred to critica care (IQR 3--9)
per 1,000 overnight admissions.

Critical Care Outreach Teams operated 24 hours/day and 7 days/week in 14 (29%)
hospitals, less than 24 hours/day in 19 (40%) hospitals, and less than 7
days/week in 13 (27%) hospitals ([supplementary Table TTT](<stableTTT>)). As
outreach provision decreased, the numbers of patients assessed by critical care
also fell (8, 5, and 4 per 1,000 overnight admissions). Two (4%) hospitals had
no CCOT, but nonetheless saw 8 patients per 1,000 overnight admissions.

There was a median of 12 (IQR 9--18) critical care beds per hospital (mixed
Level 2 --- typically intensive monitoring or single organ support, and Level 3
--- ventilated or multiple organ support), most often in a single physical
location (45 hospitals). These units admitted a median 20 (IQR 14--26) unplanned
admissions from the ward per month which represented 36% of all critical care
admissions (IQR 31-43%).

### Critical care occupancy

There were 1221 (8%) patients assessed when the unit was full, 3825 (25%)
assessed when there were either one or two beds available, and 10347 (67%)
assessed when there were more than two beds available (Table TTT). Critical care
occupancy fluctuated with time of the day, day of the week, and season of the
year.([Supplementary Figure FFF](<sfigureFFF>)).

Patient characteristics
-----------------------

Table TTT shows the baseline data for all ward patients assessed. Sepsis was
reported in (9296, 61%) patients; of these, the respiratory system was
considered to be the source in half (4772, 51%). Organ failure, defined as a
SOFA score greater than or equal to two, was present in 5164 (34%) of patients.
1427 patients (9%) were in respiratory failure, 2931 (19%) were in renal
failure, and 4636 (31%) were shocked. However, organ support at the time of
assessment was uncommon (870 patients, 6%).

Overall, 2708 (18%) patients died during the 7-days following ward assessment.
Mortality was heavily front-loaded with 1539 (57%) of these deaths occuring in
the first 48 hours (Supplementary Figure FFF). There was a clear correlation
between physiological severity and early (7-day) mortality using either ward
based (NEWS) or critical care scoring systems (SOFA, ICNARC) (Supplementary
Figure FFF).

Patient pathways following referral to critical care
----------------------------------------------------

\- [ ] NOTE(2015-12-07): summarise overall flow in the first week then repeat by
pathway

Following the bedside assessment by critical care, xx patients were admission to
critical care immediately. A further yy patients not offered critical care
immediately were admitted within the subsequent week, and .

Â 

Patients were recommended to one of three possible pathways at the bedside
assessment by critical care: ward care with treatment limits; ward care without
treatment limits; or immediate admission to critical care ([Figure
FFF](figureFFF)).

### Recommended to ward care with treatment limits

2141 (14%) patients, who were refused critical care admission, remained on the
ward with a treatment limitation order in place. These patients were older (77
vs 65 years, 95%CI for difference 11--12 years), and more acutely unwell (3.6 vs
3.1 SOFA points, 95%CI for difference 0.4--0.6). Both 7-day and 90-day
mortalities were substantial (41% (881 deaths), and 65% (1402 deaths)
respectively), but more than a fifth of patients (24%, 506 patients) survived a
year despite the treatment limitation order.

### Recommended to ward care without treatment limits

8041 (53%) patients were recommended for ward care without treatment limits.
Those recommended ward care were older (66 vs 65 years, 95%CI for difference
0.7-1.9 years), less acutely unwell (2.7 vs 3.9 SOFA points, 95%CI for
difference 1.1-1.3) and had a lower 7-day mortality (11% vs 20%, p\<0.0001).

6116 (76%) of those recommended ward care survived that week without critical
care admission. However, 1303 patients (16%) went on to receive later critical
care, and 622 patients (8%) died during the next 7 days without admission to
critical care.

### Recommended to critical care

4976 (33%) were recommended for critical care at the initial assessment. Of
these, 3375 (68%) were offered admission. Those offered admission were
marginally younger (by 1 year, 95%CI 0--2), more acutely unwell (4.1 vs 3.5 SOFA
points, 95%CI 0.5-0.7), and had a higher 7-day mortality of (21% vs 18%,
p=0.0121). 40 deaths (6%) occured on the ward before admission could be
arranged.

Of the 1601 (32%) of the patients recommended to critical care but not offered
admission, 842 (53%) survived the subsequent week without critical care. 580
(36%) were offered critical care later, and 179 (11%) died on the ward within
the week, and without critical care.

\- [ ] TODO(2015-12-07): add in table 1 baseline comparing these three groups

-   delay to admission

-   deterioration during delay

-   highest level of organ support?

-   icu free days??

-   mortality

Delay to admission to critical care
-----------------------------------

After excluding 358 patients admitted with delay due to surgery, the median
interval between ward assessment and critical care admission was 3 hours (IQR
1--9) of which 2549 (54%) of admissions were prompt (within 4 hours). For
patients recommended and accepted at the initial assessment, this fell to 2
hours (IQR 1--3) and the proportion admitted promptly rose to 75% (2219
patients). For patients recommended for critical care but not initially
accepted, the median delay to admission increased to 8 hours (3--22). For
patients not initially recommended but subsequently reassessed and accepted, the
median delay was 13 hours (IQR 5--32). The proportions admitted promptly were
27% (147 patients) and 14% (167 patients) respectively.

Critical care occupancy and patient pathways
--------------------------------------------

Critical care occupancy at the time of the bedside assessment affected patient
pathways during the week following ward assessment by critical care (Table TTT).
As bed occupancy increased then patients were less likely to be accepted to
critical care (p\<0.001), and were less likely to be admitted promptly
(p\<0.0001). Patients would deteriorate between assessment and admission as bed
occupancy decreased (Cochran-Armitage test for trend, p=0.0330). Patients were
more likely to die on the ward without admission to critical care (p\<0.0001).

Decision making, delay to admission and 90-day mortality
--------------------------------------------------------

### Decision to admit

We built logistic regression models to examine the effect of a decision to admit
on 90-day mortality for the 13246 patients without a treatment limitation order,
and for the subgroup (5107 patients) with a recommendation for critical care
following the initial bedside assessment. After adjusting for patient level
covariates, a decision to admit to critical was associated with a reduction in
90-day mortality in both analyses (OR 0.80, 95%CI 0.72--0.89, and OR 0.80, 95%CI
0.68--0.93 respectively).

Because the decision to admit might be selecting 'survivors', we used explored
whether the effect of occupancy on the decision to admit would be suitable for
an instrumental variable analysis. Occupancy was strongly associated with the
decision making after adjustment in both in single and two level models (OR xx
and yy respectively), and there was no evidence that it was a weak instrument (F
test). Under assumptions of no direct effects of occupancy on outcome (exclusion
restriction) and monotonicity, then risk difference for a decision to admit on
90-day mortality in a 2-stage linear model was xx per 1,000 patients for
patients who would have been offered critical care had a bed been available.

Results did not change significantly when the analyses were repeated in the
subgroup with better data linkage ...

### Prompt admission

For patients, offered critical care, we repeated the models to examine the
effect of prompt admission on outcome. These analyses excluded patients

We repeated the modelling to examine the effect of early delivery (within 4
hours) of that decision to admit for those patients being admitted directly from
the ward to critical care (e.g. excluding patients undergoing surgery prior to
admission). Early admission was not associated with a difference in outcome
neither for those without a treatment limitation order (OR 1.11, 95%CI
0.99--1.25), nor for those also recommended for critical care (OR 0.98, 95%CI
0.85--1.14).

-   model decision to admit with site level components

    -   repeat in subgroup recommended without treatment limits

-   comment on site vs individual level variance

Effects of initial decision making on outcome
---------------------------------------------

-   adjusted not simple raw effects

-   during week 1?

-   longer term

Instrumental variable and sensitivity analyses
----------------------------------------------

Discussion
==========

List of points to make - different response to review of patient for ward based
(outreach) vs critical care based (medics) teams; default to admit is easier for
the latter and this drives to an extent the differences in behaviour observed
for some hospitals and for out of hours referrals
